Patricio Ortiz holds a PhD. in astronomy from the University of Toronto, Canada. He has a keen interest in programming as a mean to create tools to help his research when no tools were available. He has taught at the graduate and undergraduate levels in subjects about astronomy, instrumentation, and applied programming. Throughout his career, Patricio has interacted with students at any level as well as post-graduates, helping him identify the most critical subjects needed by young scientists in the physical sciences and usually not covered by current literature. He has worked on projects involving automated super-nova detection systems; detection of fast moving solar system bodies, including Near-Earth objects and he was involved in the Gaia project (European Space Agency) for nearly ten years. Patricio also developed an ontology system used since its conception by the astronomical community to identify equivalent quantities. He also worked on an Earth Observation project, which gave him the opportunity to work extensively with high-performance computers, leading to his development of an automated task submission system which significantly decreases the execution time of data reduction of extended missions.


Patricio now works as a Research Software Engineer at the Department of Automatic Control and Systems Engineering at the University of Sheffield. He uses C, Fortran, Python, Java and Perl as his main toolkits, and as a pragmatic person, he uses the language which suits a problem best. Amongst his interests are: scientific data visualisation as a discovery tool, photography and (human) languages.