---
category: seminar
date: 2018-06-27
published: true

from: "15:30"
to: "16:30"
location: "Hicks building, Lecture Theatre 7"
speaker: "Jos Martin"
institute: "Mathworks"
title: "Software engineering in practise"

image: 
slides_url:
---
**Abstract**: Jos will discuss how MathWorks develop and extend MATLAB and its associated tools from an engineering perspective. Focusing on the opportunities – and challenges – in ensuring MATLAB continues to be the tool of choice in the world of multicore CPUs, in grids and clouds, on mobile platforms, and on GPUs. He discusses the processes involved in developing and testing MATLAB to drive usability features, development environment enhancements, and overall reliability.

**Bio**: Jos Martin is the senior engineering manager for parallel computing products at MathWorks. He has responsibility for all parts of Parallel Computing Toolbox, including the use of GPU and big data types in other areas. In addition, he is also responsible for MATLAB Drive, MATLAB Connector, and products that help link the desktop to the cloud. Before moving to a development role within MathWorks, he worked as a consultant in the U.K., writing large-scale MATLAB applications, particularly in the finance and automotive sectors. Prior to joining MathWorks in 2000, he held a Royal Society Post-Doctoral Fellowship at the University of Otago, New Zealand. His area of research was Experimental Bose-Einstein Condensation (BEC), a branch of low-temperature atomic physics.
