---
category: seminar
date: 2019-10-29
published: True

from: "12:00"
to: "13:00"
location: "COM-G12-Main Lewin"
speaker: "Chris Bording"
institute: "IBM"
title: "Virtualisation for Scientific Computing"

image:
slides_url: "https://rse.shef.ac.uk/seminar-slides/VandV.pdf"
---

**Abstract**: Basic prime on using Virtual Compute Resources to do Science!

Based on my experiences working at a number of universities and in industry supporting researchers and helping them to migrate their computational work to HPC resources, there is a significant gap in the knowledge of a majority of researcher in how to do this migration from their laptop/desktop to HPC. What I have identified is that having access to virtual compute resource can help close this knowledge gap and improve the basic compute skills of researchers and greatly reduce the effort when taking that final step of migrating work to HPC resources.

There are a number of open source tools available that enable people to use virtual machines and we will talk about Virtualbox and Vagrant. Will cover how to setup the environments and integrate the virtual systems into your work. The basics of DEVOPS so you can work in a more collaborative and sustainable environment.

**Bio**: Chris Bording, is a Research Staff Member- Senior IT Architect Research User Support Environment with IBM Research in Daresbury. Chris’ areas of interest are in supporting scientific computing with High Performance Computing resources and developing virtual resources to support an array of scientific research projects. Leads several open source tools that are focused on make HPC and Cloud resources easier to support and use. He is also certified Software Carpentry trainer and regularly gives training at the Hartree Centre.
