---
category: seminar
date: 2020-03-24
published: True

from: "12:00"
to: "13:00"
location: "Online (Google Meet)"
speaker: "Alberto Biancardi "
institute: "University of Sheffield"
title: "Object Oriented Programming in MATLAB?"

image:
slides_url:
---

**NOTE: this will be online (via Google Meet) rather than on campus**; 
see below for more information.

## Abstract

In the context of [MATLAB](https://uk.mathworks.com/products/matlab.html),
Object-oriented programming (OOP) offers a convenient way of creating new capabilities that are easily customised to specific needs.
This talk will describe the basics of how OOP is handled in MATLAB, 
some selected cases where OOP is used within MATLAB itself, 
and then some examples, mostly from my personal experience in image computing, 
to illustrate how turning to OOP can help achieve two core outcomes:

* **streamline the implementation of new features** and 
* **simplify the way they are accessed by other users**.

*NB this talk has been rescheduled from 2019-11-26.*

## Speaker biography

Alberto Biancardi is an Image Computing Scientist
in the [POLARIS](https://www.sheffield.ac.uk/polaris/home) group, Department of Infection, Immunity & Cardiovascular Disease, The University of Sheffield.
His focus is on the analysis of images of the lungs, both structural and functional,
reflecting the group's expertise in the use of hyperpolarised noble gases in magnetic resonance imaging.

## Participating in the webinar

First, add [this Event to your Google Calendar](https://calendar.google.com/event?action=TEMPLATE&tmeid=MnQ4NTIzMXM1Z3EwcGhia2hwdTdsMThmbnYgc2hlZmZpZWxkLmFjLnVrX2FuOGxoMWwybTc3ZGtqZ25lazZuNnEyb3FjQGc&tmsrc=sheffield.ac.uk_an8lh1l2m77dkjgnek6n6q2oqc%40group.calendar.google.com).

This Event contains a link to a *Google Meet* (an online meeting);
click that link just before the event is about to start.

To ensure that the event runs smoothly we ask that all participants:

* Keep their microphone muted and webcam feeds disabled throughout the webinar unless asked to do otherwise - group teleconferences can get very noisy otherwise!
* Use the 'chat' bar on the right-hand side of the screen to ask questions and make comments during the presentation.  The speaker may respond to these during the presentation and/or at the end.
* Be as courteous as you would be if you were to attend in person instead of via a Google Meet.

