---
title: '10th International Women in HPC Workshop: call for posters'
author: Will Furnass
slug: whpc-isc-2019-call
date: 2019-03-08 15:00:00 UTC+00:00
---

The [10th *International Women in HPC* workshop][whpc-isc19] will discuss methods to improve diversity and 
provide early career women with the opportunity to develop their professional skills and profile. 
It is to be held as part of the [ISC (International Supercomputing) 2019][isc-2019] conference 
on Thursday June 20th 2019 
in Frankfurt, Germany.

The workshop will include:

  - Becoming an advocate and ally of under-represented women
  - Putting in place a framework to help women take leadership positions
  - Building mentoring programmes that work effectively for women.
  - Posters and lightning talks by women working in HPC
  - Short talks on: 
    dealing with poor behaviour at work and how to help avoid it getting you down, 
    how to deal with negative feedback, 
    how to build writing into your daily routine and why it matters, etc.

### Call for posters

We invite submissions from women in industry and academia to present their work as a poster. 
Submissions are invited on all topics relating to HPC from users and developers. 
All abstracts should emphasize the computational aspects of the work, such as 
the facilities used, 
the challenges that HPC can help address and 
any remaining challenges etc.

**The call is [now open](https://womeninhpc.org/whpc-isc19/workshop/submit/)**, 
with the deadline for submissions being **March 18th 2019** ([AOE](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anywhere_on_Earth)).

*Exclusive to WHPC at ISC19*: Successful authors will have the opportunity to present their poster in the main ISC19 conference poster session.

### Workshop Organising Committee

  - Workshop Chair: [Mozhgan Kabiri Chimeh](/contact/mozhgan-kabiri-chimeh/) (University of Sheffield, UK)
  - Co-chair: Toni Collis (Appentra S.L., Spain)
  - Co-chair: Misbah Mubarak (Argonne National Laboratory, USA)
  - Submissions Chair: Weronika Filinger (EPCC, University of Edinburgh, UK)
  - Submissions Vice Chair: Khomotso Maenetja (University of Limpopo, South Africa)
  - Mentoring Chair: Elsa Gonsiorowski (Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA)
  - Invited Talks Chair: Gokcen Kestor (Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, USA)
  - Publicity Chair: Cristin Meritt (Alces Flight, UK)
  - Publicity Vice Chair: Aiman Shaikh (Science and Technology Facilities Council, UK)
  - Volunteer: Shabnam Sadegh (Technical University of Munich)


[whpc-isc19]: https://womeninhpc.org/whpc-isc19/workshop/
[isc-2019]: https://www.isc-hpc.com/
