---
layout: post
title: Infinity
author: David Jones
slug: 2020-02-06-infinity
date: 2020-02-06 14:43:00 UTC
tags:
category:
link:
description:
type: text
---

> Some days Blue wonders why anyone ever bothered making numbers
> so small; other days she supposes even infinity needs to start
> somewhere.
—[Amal El-Mohtar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amal_El-Mohtar)

Infinity.

Or, as Python programmers like to refer to it:

    numpy.inf

As a mathematical notion, infinity can be rather complicated,
but as a programming notion it is perhaps a little bit easy.

In programming, infinity has two uses:

- a "true" infinity;
- the result of a computation that is _too large_.

Computers (typically) use only a finite and fixed number of bits to encode
a floating point number.
A finite representation means that only finitely many different
numbers can be encoded, so there must be an upper limit.

For all practical purposes you can assume that your
general purposes computer
will use the ubiquitous IEEE 754 32- and 64-bit binary formats.
On such a scheme, the largest (finite) number you can represent
is somewhere between 1e308 and 2e308.

So while we can store the number 1e308 in a Python variable,
even quite straightforward looking computations will overflow
and give `inf` as the result:

    >>> big = 1e308
    >>> big
    1e+308
    >>> big + big
    inf

Getting an infinity can be a bit tricky.
In Python an infinity prints as `inf`
(technically its `repr` is `"inf"`), but you can't use `inf` as
a literal:

    >>> big = inf
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    NameError: name 'inf' is not defined

You _can_ use the `float()` function:

    >>> float("inf")
    inf

You can also use a Very Big Number (probably not a good idea):

    >>> 9e999
    inf

And as previously observed `numpy` comes with a module variable:

    numpy.inf

(You _could_ also `pip install inf` and then use `import inf`,
but my friend created that mostly as a joke).


## Is one infinity enough?

So, `inf` is bigger than all other (finite) numbers.
What about the other end of the real number line?
If `big` is a number, shouldn't `-big` also be a number?

IEEE 754 chose to implement _two_ infinities, one positive, one negative:

    >>> -float("inf")
    -inf

`-inf` is less then (in the sense of `<`) all other (finite) numbers.

As shown immediately above, the negative of infinity is
negative-infinity.
You can also do:

    >>> float("-inf")
    -inf

`numpy` users may prefer `numpy.NINF`
(short for "Negative INFinity" presumably).


## Division

You may know other fun facts about infinity:
it's the _image_ of 0 under the _reciprocal function_.
Which is fancy words for `1/0 == inf`.
Except that in Python you get an `Exception`:

    >>> 1/0
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    ZeroDivisionError: division by zero

But if you use `numpy`, you get a reasonable mathematical result:

    >>> numpy.array(1)/numpy.array(0)
    inf

(you may get a warning)

It makes sense that `1 / inf` is 0:

    >>> 1/float("inf")
    0.0

What about `1 / -inf`?

    >>> 1/-float("inf")
    -0.0

Yes, there's a negative zero.

Because IEEE 754 has 
a positive and negative infinity, it makes sense
to have a positive and a negative zero.


Negative zero is a little bit tricky, you have to be careful:

    >>> -0
    0
    >>> -0.0
    -0.0

What's the difference? The first, `-0`, is the _integer_ 0 negated.
Which is actually the same as just plain old `0`.
The second, `-0.0`, is the floating point `0.0` negated.
Which is negative zero; not the same as positive zero.

Isn't it?

    >>> -0.0 == 0.0
    True

This is basically an arcane ruling handed down from IEEE 754.
I trust that the boffins at Intel had good reasons for deciding this.

## The Value of Nothing

Let's say you really wanted to tell apart `0.0` from `-0.0`.
How do you do that?

    >>> math.copysign(1.0, -0.0)
    -1.0
    >>> math.copysign(1.0, 0.0)
    1.0


## The end of the line

Frankly, this blog post is far to long,
there is an infinite amount to be said on this subject,
and I don't have the space.

Parting messages:

- infinity is a thing that you get when using floating point
  numbers on computers;
- there are ways to reliably obtain them;
- there is much more to this topic, Goldberg's classic
  ["What Every Computer Scientist Should Know About Floating Point
  Arithmetic"](https://www.itu.dk/~sestoft/bachelor/IEEE754_article.pdf) is a good start. There are several recapitulations
  of this on the internet.


