---
layout: post
title: "We're hiring - A fixed term and open-ended Research Software Engineer"
author: RSE Team
slug: 2021-11-12-rse-roles
date: 2021-11-12 16:30:00 UTC
tags:
category:
link:
description:
type: text
---

Are you interested in joining a team to develop and facilitate reproducible software through collaborations across the whole spectrum of university research areas?

There are openings available to join the growing Research Software Engineering (RSE) team on an open-ended contract or fixed term contract. The RSE role is ideal for someone with a passion for research and for good software engineering looking to use their skills in collaborative software development and reproducible research to make an impact on research projects across the whole of the University of Sheffield and beyond.

A key responsibility of the role will be embedding software engineering skills through collaboration and training/teaching. Applicants should have experience of collaborating with key stakeholders/clients to specify, develop, improve and deliver technical software and the ability to undertake such collaborations in a research environment. You will work within the existing RSE team across a range of research projects, departments, and institutes within the university, as well as advocating good practice, providing free at the point of use support and assisting in the development of new strategic collaborations.

Educated to PhD level (close to completion, or equivalent experience), you will have a track record of high-quality software development (using a research relevant language such as R, Python, MATLAB, C, C++) and a commitment to open, reproducible research. Applications are welcome from both software development generalists and from RSEs with inter-disciplinary technology focused skills which either complement or extend our existing portfolio, such as data analytics (including statistical computing, machine learning and deep learning), numerical computing, High-Performance Computing (HPC; including multi-core and GPUs), etc.

You will enhance the university’s capability and expertise in developing research software as part of academic research and will collaborate closely with IT Services to ensure the delivery of RSE team aspects of the university’s overarching Research IT strategy.  The RSE team of 13 at the University of Sheffield is led by a former EPSRC Research Software Engineering Fellow and is guided by a steering panel of senior university staff who are committed to supporting the role of RSEs within the research community.

The post provides an excellent opportunity for research software skills development. You will actively support the wider research community and will be encouraged to represent the team in national/international activities. For example, current team members hold positions and qualifications including: membership of the Society of RSE, rOpenSci Editor, reviewers for JOSS, NVIDIA Deep Learning Institute accredited trainers, and Software Carpentries maintainers.

We are committed to exploring flexible working opportunities which benefit the individual and University.

We’re one of the best not-for-profit organisations to work for in the UK. The University’s Total Reward Package includes a competitive salary, a generous Pension Scheme and annual leave entitlement, as well as access to a range of learning and development courses to support your personal and professional development.

We build teams of people from different heritages and lifestyles from across the world, whose talent and contributions complement each other to greatest effect. We believe diversity in all its forms delivers greater impact through research, teaching and student experience.

To find out what makes the University of Sheffield a remarkable place to work, watch this short film: www.youtube.com/watch?v=7LblLk18zmo, and follow @sheffielduni and @ShefUniJobs on Twitter for more information.

Note: There is both an open-ended and fixed term role available with the intention to extend the fixed term role in the future.

**[Apply for the open-ended role here](https://jobs.shef.ac.uk/sap/bc/erecruiting/posting_apply?param=cG9zdF9pbnN0X2d1aWQ9NjE4NThFRkE3RkRFMTBGM0UxMDAwMDAwQUMxRTg4NzgmY2FuZF90eXBlPSZwb3N0aW5nX3RleHQ9eWVz&sap-client=400&sap-language=EN)**

**[Apply for the fixed term role here](https://jobs.shef.ac.uk/sap/bc/erecruiting/posting_apply?param=cG9zdF9pbnN0X2d1aWQ9NjE4OUE3RUIwNTVBNjFBQkUxMDAwMDAwQUMxRTg4NzgmY2FuZF90eXBlPSZwb3N0aW5nX3RleHQ9eWVz&sap-client=400&sap-language=EN)**
